## 2.2 Syntax Definition

### 2.2.1

>  Consider the context-free grammar

> $$S ~\rightarrow~ S~S~+~|~S~S~*~|~\mathbf{a}$$

> a) Show how the string $$\mathbf{a}\mathbf{a}+\mathbf{a}*$$ can be generated by this grammar.

$$
\begin{array}{rcl}
S &\rightarrow& SS* \\
&\rightarrow& SS+\mathbf{a}* \\
&\rightarrow& \mathbf{a}\mathbf{a}+\mathbf{a}* \\
\end{array}
$$

> b) Construct a parse tree for this string.

```
        +------S------+
        |      |      |
        |      |      |
        |      |      |
    +---S---+  S      *
    |   |   |  |
    |   |   |  |
    S   S   +  a
    |   |
    |   |
    a   a

```

> c) What language does this grammar generate? Justify your answer.

Post-fix additions and multiplications.

### 2.2.2

> What language is generated by the following grammars? In each case justify your answer.

> a) $$S~\rightarrow~0~S~1~|~0~1$$

$$n$$ zeros and $$n$$ ones, $$n > 0$$.

> b) $$S~\rightarrow~+~S~S~|~-~S~S~|~\mathbf{a}$$

Prefix additions and multiplications.

> c) $$S~\rightarrow~S~(~S~)~S~|~\epsilon$$

A sequence of matched parentheses.

> d) $$S~\rightarrow~\mathbf{a}~S~\mathbf{b}~S~|~\mathbf{b}~S~\mathbf{a}~S~|~\epsilon$$

A string with same number of $$\mathbf{a}$$ and $$\mathbf{b}$$.

> e) $$S~\rightarrow~\mathbf{a}~|~S~+~S~|~S~S~|~S~*~|~(~S~)$$

Regular expressions.

### 2.2.3

> Which of the grammars in Exercise 2.2.2 are ambiguous?

c, d, e

### 2.2.4

> Construct unambiguous context-free grammars for each of the following languages. In each case show that your grammar is correct.

> a) Arithmetic expressions in postfix notation.

$$expr~\rightarrow~expr~expr~\mathbf{op}~|~id$$

> b) Left-associative lists of identifiers separated by commas.

$$list~\rightarrow~list~,~id~|~id$$

> c) Right-associative lists of identifiers separated by commas.

$$list~\rightarrow~id~,~list~|~id$$

> d) Arithmetic expressions of integers and identifiers with the four binary operators +, -, *, /.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
factor &\rightarrow& num~|~id~|~(~expr~) \\
term &\rightarrow& term~*~factor \\
 &|& term~/~factor \\
 &|& factor \\
expr &\rightarrow& expr~+~term \\
 &|& expr~-~term \\
 &|& term \\
\end{array}$$

> ! e) Add unary plus and minus to the arithmetic operators of (d).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
factor &\rightarrow& num~|~id~|~(~expr~) \\
unary &\rightarrow& +~factor \\
 &|& -~factor \\
 &|& factor \\
term &\rightarrow& term~*~unary \\
 &|& term~/~unary \\
 &|& unary \\
expr &\rightarrow& expr~+~term \\
 &|& expr~-~term \\
 &|& term \\
\end{array}$$

### 2.2.5

> a) Show that all binary strings generated by the following grammar have values divisible by $$3$$.

> $$num~\rightarrow~11~|~1001~|~num~0~|~num~num$$

* $$(11)_2 = (3)_{10}$$ is divisible by $$3$$
* $$(1001)_2 = (9)_{10}$$ is divisible by $$3$$
* If $$num$$ is divisible by $$3$$, $$num~0$$ is $$2\cdot(3i) = 3\cdot(2i)$$, which is divisible by $$3$$.
* If $$num$$ is divisible by $$3$$, $$num~num$$ is $$(3i) \cdot 2^k + 3j = 3 \cdot (2^k \cdot i + j)$$, which is divisible by $$3$$. 

> b) Does the grammar generate all binary strings with values divisible by $$3$$?

No.

### 2.2.6

> Construct a context-free grammar for roman numerals.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
roman &\rightarrow& thousand~hundreds~tens~digits \\
thousand &\rightarrow& M~|~MM~|~MMM~|~\epsilon \\
hundred &\rightarrow& C~|~CC~|~CCC~|~\epsilon \\
ten &\rightarrow& X~|~XX~|~XXX~|~\epsilon \\
digit &\rightarrow& I~|~II~|~III~|~\epsilon \\
hundreds &\rightarrow& hundred~|~CD~|~D~hundred~|~CM \\
tens &\rightarrow& ten~|~XL~|~L~ten~|~XC \\
digits &\rightarrow& digit~|~IV~|~V~digit~|~IX \\
\end{array}$$
