### 4.4.2

> Is it possible, by modifying the grammar in any way, to construct a predictive parser for the language of Exercise 4.2.1 (postfix expressions with oprand $$a$$)?

> $$ S~\rightarrow~S~S~+~|~S~S~*~|~a$$

$$\begin{array}{lcl}
S &\rightarrow& a~S^{\prime\prime} \\
S^{\prime\prime} &\rightarrow& S~S^\prime~S^{\prime\prime}~|~\epsilon \\
S^\prime &\rightarrow& +~|~* \\
\end{array}$$

| NON-TERMINAL | $$+$$ | $$*$$ | $$a$$ | $$\$$$ |
|:------------:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|$$S$$|$$~$$|$$~$$|$$S \rightarrow a~S^{\prime\prime}$$|$$~$$|
|$$S^\prime$$|$$S^\prime \rightarrow +$$|$$S^\prime \rightarrow *$$|$$~$$|$$~$$|
|$$S^{\prime\prime}$$|$$S^{\prime\prime} \rightarrow \epsilon$$|$$S^{\prime\prime} \rightarrow \epsilon$$|$$S^{\prime\prime} \rightarrow S~S^\prime~S^{\prime\prime}$$|$$S^{\prime\prime} \rightarrow \epsilon$$|

[LL(1)](https://cyberzhg.github.io/toolbox/ll1?grammar=UyAtPiBhIFMnJwpTJyAtPiArIHwgKgpTJycgLT4gUyBTJyBTJycgfCDPtQ==)

### 4.4.3

> Compute FIRST and FOLLOW for the grammar of Exercise 4.2.1.

FIRST($$S$$) = $$\{ a \}$$

FOLLOW($$S$$) = $$\{ +, *, a, \$ \}$$

[First & Follow](https://cyberzhg.github.io/toolbox/first_follow?grammar=UyAtPiBTIFMgKyB8IFMgUyAqIHwgYQ==)

### 4.4.4

> Compute FIRST and FOLLOW for each of the grammars of Exercise 4.2.2.

> a) $$S~\rightarrow~0~S~1~|~0~1$$.

FIRST($$S$$) = $$\{ 0 \}$$

FOLLOW($$S$$) = $$\{ 1, $ \}$$

[First & Follow](https://cyberzhg.github.io/toolbox/first_follow?grammar=UyAtPiAwIFMgMSB8IDAgMQ==)

> b) $$S~\rightarrow~+~S~S~|~*~S~S~|~a$$.

FIRST($$S$$) = $$\{ +, *, a \}$$

FOLLOW($$S$$) = $$\{ +, *, a, $ \}$$

[First & Follow](https://cyberzhg.github.io/toolbox/first_follow?grammar=UyAtPiAwIFMgMSB8IDAgMQ==)

> c) $$S~\rightarrow~S~(~S~)~S~|~\epsilon$$.

FIRST($$S$$) = $$\{ (, \epsilon \}$$

FOLLOW($$S$$) = $$\{ (, ), $ \}$$

[First & Follow](https://cyberzhg.github.io/toolbox/first_follow?grammar=UyAtPiBTICggUyApIFMgfCDPtQ==)

> d) $$S~\rightarrow~S~+~S~|~S~S~|~(~S~)|~S~*~|~a$$.

FIRST($$S$$) = $$\{ (, a \}$$

FOLLOW($$S$$) = $$\{ +, (, ), *, a, $ \}$$

[First & Follow](https://cyberzhg.github.io/toolbox/first_follow?grammar=UyAtPiBTICsgUyB8IFMgUyB8ICggUyApIHwgUyAqIHwgYQ==)

> e) $$S~\rightarrow~(~L~)~|~a$$ and $$L~\rightarrow~L~,~S~|~S~$$.

FIRST($$S$$) = $$\{ (, a \}$$

FOLLOW($$S$$) = $$\{ ',', ), $ \}$$

FIRST($$L$$) = $$\{ (, a \}$$

FOLLOW($$L$$) = $$\{ ',', ) \}$$

[First & Follow](https://cyberzhg.github.io/toolbox/first_follow?grammar=UyAtPiAoIEwgKSB8IGEgTCAtPiBMICwgUyB8IFM=)

> f) $$S~\rightarrow~a~S~b~S~|~b~S~a~S~|~\epsilon$$.

FIRST($$S$$) = $$\{ a, b, \epsilon \}$$

FOLLOW($$S$$) = $$\{ a, b, $ \}$$

[First & Follow](https://cyberzhg.github.io/toolbox/first_follow?grammar=UyAtPiBhIFMgYiBTIHwgYiBTIGEgUyB8IM+1)

> g) The following grammar for boolean expressions:

> $$
\begin{array}{rll}
bexpr &\rightarrow& bexpr~\mathbf{or}~bterm~|~bterm \\
bterm &\rightarrow& bterm~\mathbf{and}~bfactor~|~bfactor \\
bfactor &\rightarrow& \mathbf{not}~bfactor~|~(~bexpr~)~|~\mathbf{true}~|~\mathbf{false} \\
\end{array}
$$

FIRST($$bfactor$$) = $$\{ \mathbf{not}, (, \mathbf{true}, \mathbf{false} \}$$

FOLLOW($$bfactor$$) = $$\{ ), \mathbf{and}, \mathbf{or}, $ \}$$

FIRST($$bterm$$) = $$\{ \mathbf{not}, (, \mathbf{true}, \mathbf{false} \}$$

FOLLOW($$bterm$$) = $$\{ ), \mathbf{and}, \mathbf{or}, $ \}$$

FIRST($$bexpr$$) = $$\{ \mathbf{not}, (, \mathbf{true}, \mathbf{false} \}$$

FOLLOW($$bexpr$$) = $$\{ ), \mathbf{or}, $ \}$$

[First & Follow](https://cyberzhg.github.io/toolbox/first_follow?grammar=YmV4cHIgLT4gYmV4cHIgb3IgYnRlcm0gfCBidGVybSAKYnRlcm0gLT4gYnRlcm0gYW5kIGJmYWN0b3IgfCBiZmFjdG9yIApiZmFjdG9yIC0+IG5vdCBiZmFjdG9yIHwgKCBiZXhwciApIHwgdHJ1ZSB8IGZhbHNl)

### 4.4.5

> The grammar $$S~\rightarrow~a~S~a~|~a~a$$ generates all even-length strings of $$a$$'s. We can devise a recursive-descent parser with backtrack for this grammar. If we choose to expand by production $$S~\rightarrow~a~a$$ first, then we shall only recognize the string $$aa$$. Thus, any reasonable recursive-descent parser will try $$S~\rightarrow~a~S~a$$ first.

> a) Show that this recursive-descent parser recognizes input $$aa$$, $$aaaa$$, and $$aaaaaaaa$$, but not $$aaaaaa$$.

> b) What language does this recursive-descent parser recognize?

$$2^n$$ $$a$$s.

### 4.4.6

> A grammar is $$\epsilon$$-_free_ if no production body is $$\epsilon$$ (called an $$\epsilon$$-_production_).

> a) Give an algorithm to convert any grammar into an $$\epsilon$$-free grammar that generates the same language.

Find all nullables in a production, enumerate all the situations that each nullable appears or not.

> b) Apply your algorithm to the grammar $$S~\rightarrow~a~S~b~S~|~b~S~a~S~|~\epsilon$$.

$$\begin{array}{lcl}
S &\rightarrow& a~S~b~S \\
&|& a~S~b \\
&|& a~b~S \\
&|& a~b \\
&|& b~S~a~S \\
&|& b~S~a \\
&|& b~a~S \\
&|& b~a \\
\end{array}$$

### 4.4.7

> A _single production_ is a production whose body is a single nonterminal, i.e., a production of the form $$A \rightarrow B$$.

> a) Give an algorithm to convert any grammar into a $$\epsilon$$-free grammar, with no single productions, that generate the same language.

If $$A \Rightarrow B$$, replace $$A$$ with $$B$$.

> b) Apply your algorithm to the grammar (4.1) in Section 4.1.2.

> $$\begin{array}{lcl}
E &\rightarrow& E~+~T~|~T \\
T &\rightarrow& T~*~F~|~F \\
F &\rightarrow& (~E~)~|~\mathbf{id} \\
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{lcl}
E &\rightarrow& E~+~T~|~T~*~F~|~(~E~)~|~\mathbf{id} \\
T &\rightarrow& T~*~F~|~(~E~)~|~\mathbf{id} \\
\end{array}$$

> c) Show that, as a consequence of part (a), we can convert a grammar into an equivalent grammar that has no _cycles_.

Always more symbols.

### 4.4.8

> A grammar is said to be in _Chomsky Normal Form_(CNF) if every production is either of the form $$A \rightarrow BC$$ or of the form $$A \rightarrow a$$, where $$A$$, $$B$$, and $$C$$ are nonterminals and $$a$$ is a terminal. Show how to convert any grammar into a CNF grammar for the same language.

$$\begin{array}{lcl}
F &\rightarrow& BC~|~\mathbf{id} \\
B &\rightarrow& ( \\
C &\rightarrow& ED \\
D &\rightarrow& ) \\
\end{array}$$

### 4.4.9

> Every language that has a context-free grammar can be recognized in at most $$O(n^3)$$ time for strings of length $$n$$. A simple way to do so, called the _Cocke-Younger-Kasami_ (or CYK) algorithm is based on dynamic programming. That is, given a string $$a_1a_2\cdots a_n$$, we construct an $$n$$-by-$$n$$ table $$T$$ such that $$T_{ij}$$ is the set of nonterminals that generate the substring $$a_i a_{i+1} \cdots a_j$$. If the underlying grammar is in CNF, then one table entry can be filled in $$O(n)$$ time, provided we fill the entries in the proper order: lowest value of $$j-i$$ first. Write an algorithm that correctly fills in the entries of the table, ans show that your algorithm takes $$O(n^3)$$ time. Having filled in the table, how do you determine whether $$a_1 a_2 \cdots a_n$$ is in the language?

$$dp[i][j][A]$$, $$i$$ and $$j$$ are the start and end position, $$A$$ is the index of the symbol.

```
for i in 1 to n:
    if A -> ai:
        dp[i][i + 1][A] = true
for l in 2 to n:
    for i in 1 to n:
        j = i + l
        for k in i + 1 to j:
            if A -> BC and dp[i][k][B] and dp[k][j][C]:
                dp[i][j][A] = true
```

### 4.4.10

> Show how, having filled in the table as in Exercise 4.4.9, we can in $$O(n)$$ time recover a parse tree for $$a_1 a_2 \cdots a_n$$.

Record the production and $$k$$.

### 4.4.11

> Modify your algorithm of Exercise 4.4.9 so that it will find, for any string, the smallest number of insert, delete, and mutate errors needed to turn the string into a string in the language of the underlying grammar.

$$error[i][j][A]$$

```
for i in 1 to n:
    dp[i][i][A] = 1
    if A -> ai:
        error[i][i + 1][A] = 0
    else:
        error[i][i + 1][A] = 1

error[i][j][A] = min(error[i][j][A], error[i][k][B] + error[k + 1][j][C])
```

### 4.4.12

> In Fig. 4.24 is a grammar for certain statements. You may take $$e$$ and $$s$$ to be terminals standing for conditional expressions and "other statements", respectively. If we resolve the conflict regarding expansion of the optional "else" by preferring to consume an __else__ from the input whenever we see one, we can build a predictive parser for this grammar. Using the idea of synchronizing symbols described in Section 4.4.5.

> a) Build an error-correcting predictive parsing table for the grammar.

> b) Show the behavior of your parser on the following inputs:
